# Introduction
We are inviting data scientists to participate in an exciting ML competition! The goal is to develop a machine learning model that can accurately predict the probability of default for our consumer contracts at [address]. The winner of this challenge will be awarded the opportunity to become an ML service provider for a consumer contract located at [address], earning fees for each inference performed.

# Competition Details
## Data:

**Input data:**
- On-chain metadata: Accessible from the contract pool [address]
- Off-chain metadata: Retrieved from the trusted source API [api-url] corresponding to LAT ID

**Training data: [link to ipfs]** 

**Test data for validators: [api]** 

**API to access test result data (validators only): [URL]** 

> Note: Validators must sign messages using their registered Credio private key before sending them to the API. The competition creator will verify the signature off-chain and return the result to the validator. Additionally, the timestamp may be checked before responding.

## Model Development:

- Model input: [10 off-chain fields, 5 on-chain fields] --> [PD] in scale params 10 (using Credio CLI gen setting file)

- Model verification: Utilize aggregate feature on CLI to create 3 contract verifiers: single proof, aggregate 2 proof, aggregate 5 proof

- Model development tool: Credio CLI

## Timeline:
Model submission deadline: 30 days from contract creation

For each model submission, Modeler must provide the following:

- Commit model verification key: This includes keys for both off-chain verification and the on-chain verification contract.

- API to get zkML model inference: This API allows the validator to retrieve results generated by your model using zkML.

- API to get pure ML model inference: This API allows users (including validator) to retrieve results generated by your model without zk-proofs (pure machine learning).

## Evaluation:
Evaluation criteria: Modeler with the highest accuracy in predicting default probability on the test data set
Winner's prize: Opportunity to become an ML service provider for the consumer contract at [address], earning 1 USD per inference for predicting the default probability of a single asset (5 USD for aggregate 5 proof)

## Staking:
Participating modelers must stake tokens. In case of winning the challenge, the modeler will upload proofs to the on-chain and claim rewards from consumers.
The challenge creator will also stake tokens to prevent spam challenges and enable a future reporting mechanism.

